Hong Kongers urged to take precautions after 3rd dengue fever case confirmed

The Controller of the Center for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health, Leung Ting- hung, on Friday announced an investigation into the third confirmed case of dengue fever in Hong Kong this year, and urged the public to take precautions against mosquito-transmitted diseases.

According to CHP, the female patient, 36, became ill with fever, headache and muscle pain on Sunday and consulted a private doctor on Wednesday. She was transferred to the Princess Margaret Hospital on the same day and is now in stable condition with low grade fever.

The patient tested positive for dengue virus type 4 on Friday night. She said she was bitten by mosquitoes and had no recent traveling outside Hong Kong during incubation period. The patient' s home contacts have remained asymptomatic so far and will be put under medical observation.

"We are highly concerned about this additional case. Based on current epidemiological findings, we suspect that there might be possible local transmission of dengue virus in other areas," Leung said.

"The blood sample of the second local case was positive for dengue virus type 1, indicating more than one source of infection. We are working closely with the Food and Environmental Hygiene Department (FEHD) for all-out efforts to assess and prevent any spread of infection."

Up to now, 100 dengue fever cases - 3 local and 97 imported - were reported to the CHP this year. In 2013 and 2012, 103 and 53 cases were recorded respectively and all were imported.

"At present, no effective vaccine for dengue fever is available. Therefore, the best preventive measures are to avoid mosquito bites and to eliminate pockets of stagnant water that serve as breeding sites for mosquitoes," Leung said.

Dengue fever is a mosquito-borne disease caused by the dengue virus. Symptoms include fever, headache, muscle and joint pains, and a characteristic rash. In a small proportion of cases the disease develops into the life-threatening dengue hemorrhagic fever.
