Hong Kong reports 3rd locally acquired dengue case, Tokyo park reopens

The Hong Kong Centre for Health Protection (CHP) of the Department of Health (DH) announced they were investigating a third local transmission of dengue fever in the past week or so, the first time autochthonous dengue fever has been reported in Hong Kong since 2010.Image/CDC
Image/CDC
The female patient, aged 36 with underlying illness, has presented with fever, headache and myalgia on November 2 and consulted a private doctor on November 5. She was then referred to the Accident and Emergency Department of Princess Margaret Hospital and was admitted for further management on the same day. She is now in stable condition with low grade fever.
The patient’s blood sample was tested positive for dengue virus type 4 upon testing by the CHP’s Public Health Laboratory Services Branch.
According to CHP Controller, Dr Leung Ting-hung, “We are highly concerned about this additional case. Based on current epidemiological findings, we suspect that there might be possible local transmission of dengue virus in other areas. The blood sample of the second local case was positive for dengue virus type 1, indicating more than one source of infection. We are working closely with the Food and Environmental Hygiene Department (FEHD) for all-out efforts to assess and prevent any spread of infection.”
This brings the total dengue case count in Hong Kong to 100, 97 cases being imported.
In Japan, Central Tokyo’s Yoyogi Park was reopened after being closed for approximately 2 months after being linked the the country’s first locally acquired dengue outbreak in some 70 years.
According to the Japan Times, the decision to reopen the park comes as the mosquito population there has fallen due to cold temperatures and no mosquitoes caught there have tested positive for the virus since Sept. 18.
A Tokyo government official said, “It’s extremely unlikely for virus carrying mosquitoes to remain in the park”, as the life span of mosquitoes is about 30-40 days.
