
Rajaiah confirms 465 dengue positive cases

Health Minister and Deputy Chief Minister T. Rajaiah, on Wednesday said the government would soon install 25 platelet separator machines at different hospitals across Telangana. He said this was one of the measures being undertaken by the government to strengthen health care in the State.

The Deputy Chief Minister told reporters after visiting the Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS) Adilabad, that the government would also ask doctors in rural areas to take up awareness programmes to eliminate the feeling of insecurity among common people. He said people were feeling insecure owing to the falsehood being spread by private and corporate hospitals regarding the spread of dengue.

Mr. Rajaiah reiterated that there was not even one death due to dengue recorded so far in the State. He however, conceded that 465 positive cases of dengue had been identified across the State.

Talking in detail about the disease, the Health Minister said depletion of platelets did not mean that the illness was dengue. He said people had died of other reasons in the district, especially the agency area, though he did not specify the number of deaths or the causes due to which the deaths had occurred in recent months.

The Deputy Chief Minister later visited Utnoor hospital. He had earlier reviewed the situation with doctors and officials in the district.

Nizamabad Special Correspondent adds: Asking hospital authorities to send proposals to add another 100 beds in the 500-bedded Government Medical College cum Teaching Hospital, Dr. Rajaiah said an amount of Rs.31 crore was sanctioned for the construction of a nursing school and college to be attached to the medical college. If the district administration identifies required land for the purpose, it will become a reality, he said.

Member of Parliament K. Kavitha said that with the release of Rs. 28 crore for improving facilities, the MCI had granted sanction to the medical college for the second year. The remaining Rs. 32 crore will also be released soon. Admitting that dengue fever was prevalent across the State, she said with the timely intervention of doctors, it could be controlled.
