
Eight Persons Quarantined as Doctor Tests Positive for Ebola

Prof Onyebuchi Chukwu, Health Minister

Eight Persons Quarantined as Doctor Tests Positive for Ebola
  First Consultants: Test results still awaited from LUTH, WHO lab in Senegal
  FG inaugurates c’ttee on research, cure for virus, debunks claim bitter kola is a cure
  US sends 50 experts to W’Africa as S’Korea rejects three Nigerians
  LUTH screens patients, starts training of personnel
  Death toll rises to 887 in sub-region
Chiemelie Ezeobi, Gboyega Akinsanmi  , Paul Obi   and Amby Uneze 
 
In confirmation of the fears of the public that the American-Liberian, Mr. Patrick Sawyer, who succumbed to the infectious Ebola virus in Lagos less than two weeks ago, may have spread the dreaded disease before his death, the federal and Lagos State Governments yesterday confirmed the second case of Ebola in the country.

Speaking on the development, the Minister of Health, Prof. Onyebuchi Chukwu, and Lagos State Commissioner for Health, Dr. Jide Idris, in separate news conferences in Abuja and Lagos, said the new case was as a result of the contact a female doctor from First Consultants Medical Centre, a Lagos-based hospital, had with Sawyer where the Liberian was treated before his death.

This is the first recorded case where a Nigerian has been confirmed to have contracted the Ebola virus.
However, when contacted, a reliable source in First Consultants informed THISDAY that the hospital was still awaiting the laboratory results on the doctor as well as seven others who came in contact with Sawyer, but have been quarantined.

A senior consultant with the hospital said: “We cannot at this time verify that the doctor has tested positive as we are still awaiting the preliminary laboratory results from LUTH (Lagos University Teaching Hospital) as well as confirmatory results from the WHO (World Health Organisation) virology lab in Senegal.

“Until these arrive, we cannot confirm that the doctor or others have contracted Ebola. I do not know where the government got its own results or information from but we are still calling the lab in Lagos for preliminary results.”
He said it took First Consultants to blow the whistle on the presence of the epidemic in Nigeria, adding, “Everyone now has to be careful.”

The consultant also lamented the fact that Nigeria lacked a top-notch diagnostic laboratory where diseases like Ebola could be tested, stating: “This says a lot about Nigeria that we had to move our blood samples to Senegal. We ought to focus on making resources available to undertake proper diagnosis of diseases.”

Although, for professional reasons, he declined to disclose the identity of the medical personnel from his hospital who had been quarantined or where they were being kept in an isolation ward, other sources revealed that in addition to the female doctor, others who had been isolated included two nurses, the cleaners who washed the beddings used by Sawyer and mortuary attendants who handled his corpse.

Of the eight, the sources said the doctor and nurses were showing symptoms of the virus.
However, during the briefing in Abuja, the Minister of Health said: “When we met last week, I told you that we were still monitoring some of the healthcare workers and passengers who came in contact with the American-Liberian who brought Ebola to Nigeria. There were others who attended to him, some have developed symptoms of Ebola.

“As of today, we now have a case; this is the second case of the Ebola virus in Nigeria. This is the doctor who attended to the Ebola patient in Nigeria.”

Continuing, Chukwu said three others were under watch, adding: “At the end of today (yesterday), we will know the outcome. Eight of those who had contact with Mr. Sawyer have been quarantined, while 70 of those who had contact with the patient are under surveillance.”

The minister explained that all of the eight persons had been quarantined in Lagos where the state government had provided isolation wards.

“Beyond Lagos State, the federal government is working with each state to strengthen isolation wards, and on emergency coordination of the health workforce on Ebola around the borders,” Chukwu added.
He said places like Idi Iroko and Seme borders had been given new directives and equipment to screen persons entering the country without having contact with such persons.

Chukwu further pointed out that the ban imposed on airlines to stop them from conveying corpses from Ebola-endemic countries for burial in Nigeria was still in force. The affected countries are Liberia, Guinea and Sierra Leone.

Taking time to clear the air on cases where corpses were brought in from Liberia, Chukwu said: “In the case of Imo State, we have carried out the investigation and found out that there was a dead certificate and it was not an Ebola case, so we have asked the Commissioner for Health in Imo State to go ahead with the burial of the person. But for Anambra State and Akwa Ibom State, investigations are still ongoing; they are still under watch.”

The minister also debunked claims making the rounds, especially on social media, that bitter kola – an African fruit with medicinal qualities – can cure and as well prevent the Ebola virus, stating, “There is no scientific evidence that the use of bitter kola cures or prevents Ebola.

“Though the research on bitter kola was not concluded, no progress can be made without research. For now, there is no scientifically proven vaccine or drug for the treatment of Ebola.”
